SOURCE TITLE: Integrated Assessment for Maori Youth Learners entering Tertiary Education for the First Time
ORGANISATION: Ako Aotearoa
SOURCE TYPE: PDF report
SOURCE URL: https://ako.ac.nz/assets/Knowledge-centre/RHPF-c32-Integrated-assessment-for-Maori-youth-learners/RESEARCH-REPORT-Integrated-Assessment-for-Maori-Youth-Learners-entering-Tertiary-Education.pdf
EXTRACTION NOTE: Substantial text extract from the web-parsed PDF, focused on executive summary, integrated assessment model, trial analysis, implications, recommendations, and conclusion.

--- TITLE AND CONTENTS ---
Integrated Assessment for Maori youth learners entering tertiary education for the first time
Hannah Hohapata
Matapuna Training Centre
May 2011

Contents
Executive Summary
1. Introduction
2. Integrated Assessment
3. Background
4. Project Framework
5. Integrated Assessment "A Te Ao Maori Perspective"
6. Mentors and Maori Youth Learners
7. Literacy
8. Resources / Documentation
9. Pre and Post Moderation
10. Team Teaching / Peer Observation / Peer Assessment
11. Individual Learning Plans (ILP)
12. Lesson Plans
13. The Learner Trials
14. Trial Resources / Analysis
15. Moving Forward after the Trials
16. Challenges in 2010
17. Implications for Maori Youth Learners
18. Significant Change - NZQA 2011
19. The Learning - for our organisation
20. Recommendations
21. Conclusion

--- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ---
Entering tertiary education for the first time can be a daunting experience for Maori youth who leave mainstream education with few or no qualifications and a history of truancy, or exclusion from mainstream education.

This report provides insight from an action research project using a methodology of integrated assessment with Maori youth learners entering tertiary education for the first time. Mentors worked alongside Maori youth learners to facilitate the assessment process and linked achievement with naturally occurring evidence from activities learners engaged in during the course.

This action research project was initially developed to help Maori youth who struggle with assessment using only a workbook.

The key outcomes of this action research:
- Collaboration between management, staff, and students required input across the organisation.
- Student achievement increased by 20-30 credits for learners in the trials during the trial timeframe.
- Maori achieving success as Maori: engagement with learning was significantly increased when learning linked to acknowledgement of Te Ao Maori and Maori pedagogies, such as mentoring.
- Teaching practice for this project required more effort and time, such as recording of data.
- Methodology: this type of assessment did not cater for every learner.

This report confronts current organisation, teaching and assessment practice, attitudes and government policy. It considers a strategic approach to integrated assessment which will be needed to effect sustained change in attitudes and teaching practice.

--- INTEGRATED ASSESSMENT MODEL ---
A key concept of this project was that naturally occurring evidence gathered before, during and after an activity or task would provide evidence of what students already know before, how well students performed during, and through feedback, discussion and reflection, learning gain would be measured after to evidence and support achievement of relevant unit standards.

Mentors would work alongside students to support the learning process. Observers, including peers and others within the organisation, would gather evidence. The assessor would consider the evidence and make a judgement using an evidence schedule as to whether the evidence met the required outcomes.

The framework for this project was built around the principles of integrated assessment using mentors, deliberate acts of assessment and explicitly developed resources.

--- TE AO MAORI PERSPECTIVE ---
Making the link to Te Ao Maori during learning, instruction and assessment acknowledges the cultural identity of Maori students and improves retention.

Making the link to Te Ao Maori can be integrated into organisational practice such as providing a Maori and English glossary in the student handbook, employing te reo speaking staff, integrating tikanga and kawa as part of everyday culture, and engaging students in activities that encourage group learning, korero, wellness, and values such as manaakitanga.

When Maori students are culturally confident, they are more likely to experience success.

--- LEARNER TRIALS AND ANALYSIS ---
Student responses were positive, particularly when they realised there were no workbooks involved. Most of the comments from participants reflected on how "awesome" it was going to be not having to fill out the workbook although there was apprehension as well from a couple as workbooks were all they knew about assessment.

The trials occurred as a natural part of the course environment, and took place in activities which learners were involved in such as induction, interview, developing ILPs, needs assessment, cultural activities such as noho marae and powhiri, teamwork, classroom activities using reading, writing, speaking and listening strategies, performance, and employment-related activities such as producing a CV for an interview.

Analysis from the noho marae trial included:
- We deliberately embedded integrated assessment by looking at the roles and responsibilities, tasks and opportunities for capturing naturally occurring evidence prior to the event.
- The marae noho provided a real context which was important to the assessment process because a workbook is often very clinical.
- During the noho, there were many opportunities to link achievement to other units such as literacy, communication skills, karanga, te reo Maori units and related elements.
- Students reflected on the foundation and workplace skills achieved during the debriefing session at the end of the noho marae.
- The most useful learning gain from engaging in embedding is actually the process itself, that thinking broadens to include the whole of the organization, mentor or teacher, and the student rather than just the actual assessment of a unit standard.

Other feedback from the trials:
- Mentors appeared re-energized and more motivated.
- Responses from mentors, staff, and Maori youth learners involved in the trials were significantly positive.
- Credit achievement was increased in a shorter timeframe.
- Youth credit achievement improved by 20-30 credits plus.

--- IMPLICATIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS, CONCLUSION ---
Implications for Maori Youth Learners:
Maori youth learners entering tertiary education for the first time tend to conform to the systems within an organisation and do whatever is asked of them without question. Often, students have already demonstrated competency through naturally occurring events or their course activities but usually providers wait until the actual assessment event to capture the evidence. The students experience failure when they do not complete the workbook which many providers use to provide evidence of achievement.

Significant Change - NZQA 2011:
NZQA released draft literacy and numeracy unit standards whose special notes reflected a significant change in assessment practice. For example, it was not anticipated that a one-off assessment event would be used to assess learners.

Recommendations:
- Tertiary providers should maximise funding to build their internal capability to embed literacy and numeracy and integrated assessment at the same time.
- Tertiary providers should access and maximise funding from available resources such as Ako Aotearoa, Te Ara Piki Ako, Te Puni Kokiri, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Social Development, Youth Justice, Ministry of Youth Affairs, ACE funding, or TEC via their Innovation Fund.
- Tertiary providers should maximise Learning Progression literacy and numeracy resources and professional development opportunities.
- Tertiary providers should link with other similar providers of the same qualifications to build internal capability and share resources.

Conclusion:
The most important learning from this project has been the feedback from mentors and Maori youth engaged in the project along with the realisation that this work will take time.

The key short-term objectives were met and the resources developed were useful, and responsiveness from learners, mentors and others to the project framework concepts of embedding integrated assessment were positive and highly supportive.

The thinking, systems and practice about assessment and moderation have been ingrained over many years and the early focus on needing written evidence has created barriers to achievement.

Overall, this project was successful for the Maori youth learners involved in the trials because achievement increased and their cultural identity and values were acknowledged. Students' fear of assessment decreased significantly when they realised that the learning experiences described above were all activities that provided opportunities to gather evidence of achievement and competence.
