APA CITATION TO USE: Matamua, R. (2016). Hei taunaki i te ako: Assessment and moderation for te reo Māori in the tertiary sector in Aotearoa New Zealand. Ako Aotearoa.

SOURCE TITLE: Hei Taunaki i te Ako - Assessment and Moderation for te reo Maori in the Tertiary Sector in Aotearoa New Zealand
ORGANISATION: Ako Aotearoa
SOURCE TYPE: PDF report
SOURCE URL: https://ako.ac.nz/assets/Knowledge-centre/NPF-11-002-Hei-Taunaki-i-te-Ako/hei-taunaki-i-te-ako-final-report.pdf
EXTRACTION NOTE: Substantial text extract from the web-parsed PDF, focused on title, contents, executive summary, introduction, methodology, and findings.

--- TITLE AND PUBLICATION DETAILS ---
A success case model
Rangi Matamua
Hei Taunaki i te Ako - Assessment and moderation for te reo Maori in the tertiary sector in Aotearoa New Zealand

Author
Dr Rangi Matamua

This project was supported through the Ako Aotearoa National Project Fund.
Publishers
Ako Aotearoa - The National Centre for Tertiary Teaching Excellence
Published: September 2016
ISBN 978-0-947516-11-6

--- TABLE OF CONTENTS (EXTRACT) ---
1.0 Executive Summary
2.0 Introduction
3.0 Methodology
4.0 Selected Literature Review
5.0 Te Wananga o Aotearoa
6.0 Te Whare Wananga o Waikato: Te Pua Wananga ki te Ao
7.0 Auckland University of Technology
8.0 Te Panekiretanga o te Reo
9.0 Findings
10. Conclusion
11. References

--- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY (EXTRACT) ---
1.1 This report contains findings from an analysis of a selected literature review, an examination of four organisational structures, and a qualitative survey of eight kaiako (lecturer/teacher) and 17 students from the selected providers. This particular report is concerned with understanding issues of assessment and moderation of te reo Maori within the tertiary sector.

1.2 This research project - Hei Taunaki i te Ako - has been established by Ako Aotearoa to better understand good practice in terms of assessing and moderating te reo Maori at the tertiary level. The scope of the research is to develop a summary of good practice that relates to assessment and moderation standards for te reo Maori in the tertiary sector, based on the study of four successful te reo Maori tertiary programmes.

1.3 One of the fundamental limitations with this research is the lack of any language benchmark for te reo Maori at the tertiary level. Unlike secondary school education, which has a standard curriculum, tertiary institutions develop their own teaching and learning levels based on their teaching abilities and the needs of the students. These teaching and learning levels can differ considerably from institution to institution, therefore trying to determine a best approach for the entire sector is very difficult. However, there are some common characteristics of good practice that can be applied regardless of the institution, and this report attempts to highlight these key features.

1.4 The literature review shows that while the instruction of te reo Maori has been part of the New Zealand education system since the 1960s, the actual development of educational resources for the language began as far back as the early 1800s. However, findings also reveal that for the tertiary level, there is little research or literature centred on assessment and moderation for te reo Maori.

1.5 Four providers are involved in this report, and each has its own unique organisational structure, vision, and goals. All these groups are successful te reo Maori providers within the tertiary sector, and all teach te reo Maori across a number of different language acquisition levels. These four providers represent a cross-section of successful te reo Maori teaching institutions.

1.6 Successful assessment and moderation reflect the organisation's values and goals. These assessments test the student's abilities to achieve the outcomes the provider has established. If the organisation is focused on increasing spoken te reo Maori, this should be reflected in both the assessments and moderation. Likewise, if the organisation is focused on teaching karanga and whaikorero then again this needs to be shown in the assessment and moderation component.

1.7 Successful assessment and moderation needs to be modern and relative to the students enrolled on the te reo Maori programme. These same assessment and moderation processes should focus on the use of modern language and modern situations, and reflect the world in which the students live. Furthermore, assessment and moderation need to change and develop to keep pace with a changing society.

1.8 Whanau, hapu, and iwi aspirations need to be part of successful assessment and moderation. These aspirations need to be taken into account when te reo Maori testing is being developed. If whanau wish to increase the amount of te reo Maori used in the home, then both the focus on the programme and the assessment and moderation approach should be driven by this desire. Likewise, if iwi and hapu are seeking to increase the amount and quality of the language used in ceremonies, then the assessment and moderation should again reflect this want.

1.9 Successful te reo Maori assessment and moderation at the tertiary level concentrate on the four main areas: speaking, listening, reading, and writing. Of these four aspects, participants to this survey identified speaking as the most vital in securing the future of the language. While it is agreed that all four components are important, the feedback from the interviews highlight students' desire for more assessment and moderation concentrated on improving their spoken language.

1.10 Constructive feedback is vital in successful assessment and moderation. This feedback should include the findings from the assessments, with follow-up discussions supporting students on their language journey. This feedback lets students know where they sit in relation to their language progression, and also identifies areas where they need to improve. Also, follow-up tests should be implemented for students to understand how they are developing.

1.11 Time must be a part of successful te reo Maori assessment and moderation within the tertiary sector. Time should be set aside to develop, implement, and review assessments, and to improve the moderation processes. Students also need to spend time with kaiako going over their assessment results and planning the next stage of their language journey.

1.12 This study shows that more research into successful te reo Maori assessment and moderation within the tertiary sector needs to be conducted. This study should be seen as one component in a much larger research movement that looks to better understand how successful assessment and moderation can be developed and applied across the tertiary sector.

--- INTRODUCTION AND METHODOLOGY (EXTRACT) ---
Ako Aotearoa National Centre for Tertiary Teaching Excellence seeks to better understand issues about assessment and moderation of te reo Maori within the tertiary sector. In recent times, the growth of kaupapa Maori principles within the tertiary sector has been evident.

To address these assumptions, Ako Aotearoa developed a research project (Hei Taunaki i te Ako) to ascertain how accurate the above statements are, and to better understand good practice in terms of assessing and moderating te reo Maori at a tertiary level.

The programmes for the research were selected on the following basis:
1. Different types of provider, such as PTE, Wananga, ITP, University, Marae-based.
2. Different forms of provision, such as e-learning and blended learning.
3. Different levels, from level one through to degree level study.
4. High success and completion rates.
5. Reputation across the sector.
6. Strong hapu, iwi or community support.

To collect the data for this project, a success case model was implemented. This method involved in-depth qualitative interviews conducted with teachers and students from four te reo Maori programmes, located within four selected te reo Maori providers. This approach was combined with a detailed review of the various reports and documents related to the four providers, and a wider selected literature review.

The three approaches used to collect the data were:
- A selected literature review based on assessment and moderation of te reo Maori
- A brief overview of the providers selected within this study, and an examination of the particular te reo Maori programmes these providers deliver
- A series of face-to-face interviews with a selection of teachers and students of the selected te reo Maori programmes

--- FINDINGS (EXTRACT) ---
9.2 Reflection of organisation's values
It was generally agreed that the organisation's values and principles needed to be reflected in assessment and moderation. For example, if the provider's vision is to increase the amount and quality of formal te reo Maori used on the marae, or in public forums, then the testing needed to reflect this goal. On the other hand, if the programme is geared towards transforming whanau by increasing te reo Maori used in homes at a basic conversational level, then again the testing should reflect this goal.

Therefore, the findings show that successful assessment not only reflects the abilities of the students, but also highlights the vision of the institution. The organisation's values should be clearly identified in the assessment and moderation process and support the students to realise the vision of the provider.

9.3 Modern moderation and assessment
Students interviewed as part of this research agreed that moderation, assessment, and testing need to be relative to their own life experience and expectations. At the same time, these processes should be modern and continually updated. The students spoke of the need to be able to use a language that had meaning to their generation and their community.

Successful assessment and moderation at a tertiary level are those that are relevant to the students, those that are topical, and those that change and develop with time. Moderation, assessment, and testing that might apply to one generation may not cross over to another. This means successful te reo Maori moderation in the tertiary sector needs to be in a continuous state of development.

9.4 Whanau, hapu and iwi aspirations in moderation and assessment
All providers involved in this research project discussed how assessment and moderation within their particular courses needed to be part of wider whanau, hapu, and iwi aspirations.

The evidence shows that successful assessment and moderation take account of the wider aspirations of whanau, hapu and iwi, rather than only the narrow requirements of a single programme.
