====================================================================================================
SOURCE FILE: EJ1412183.pdf
SOURCE TYPE: PDF
PAGE COUNT: 22
EXTRACTION FORMAT: Plain text with page markers preserved
====================================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                         Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.




    Promoting inclusive practice for autistic
    learners: Universal design for learning
    Fiona Mitchell




          ABSTRACT
          The Universal Design for Learning (UDL) framework has the potential to enhance the
          inclusive practices of teachers with autistic learners in their classes. This study
          examines the extent to which the UDL framework is currently being used as a model
          for the inclusion of autistic learners in New Zealand primary schools. This study
          gathered data from a survey conducted online by primary teachers of autistic
          learners, and used the Universal Design for Learning guidelines to ask teachers how
          they felt they were using them within their classroom programmes. The study
          concludes that while some teachers are aware of and use the UDL framework, there
          is still work that needs to be done to ensure that it is consistently and consciously
          used to benefit autistic learners. There needs to be robust professional development
          programmes accessible to all teachers to see the UDL framework fully utilised within
          New Zealand primary schools.


          KEYWORDS
          Universal design for learning, inclusion, autism, New Zealand inclusive practices




Rationale
Within my role as a Specialist Outreach Teacher, I work across a range of different schools, and with
a variety of teams and children who all have differing needs and are funded through the Ongoing
Resourcing Scheme (ORS)1. My role is to support the teams working with the child to encourage an
inclusive and equitable learning experience for the child. This can sometimes mean working directly
with the child, with the teacher aide to model strategies, adapting curriculum resources, and
supporting teachers to consider these children when they are planning learning experiences. In 2021,
I conducted research on the barriers teachers face when implementing an inclusive education




1
  The Ongoing Resourcing Scheme (ORS) helps students to join in and learn alongside their peers. It is for
students who have a high ongoing level of need for specialist support at school and meet the criteria. Once a
student is funded, it stays with them for their time at school (Ministry of Education, 2021).



                                                                                                                30

--- PAGE 2 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                      Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



(F. Mitchell, 2023). Almost half of participants did not understand what inclusive education is, and
therefore were unsure how to implement it in their classrooms.

This led me to investigate the Universal Design for Learning framework, which promotes inclusivity,
diversity and equity. This is a framework that, if implemented, could support all learners to access
their right to an inclusive education by designing learning to meet the diverse and variable learning
needs of the children. I have chosen to focus on this framework as the Ministry of Education
recommends it as the optimal inclusive framework, and they provide online resources for teachers to
be able to understand and implement it (Ministry of Education, 2018).

By conducting this research, I aim to continue my mission of educating and supporting the teams
that work with the children I support, and others, to really reflect on their attitudes and practices,
and how they could best support all learners. I have chosen to narrow my focus down to autistic
learners, as in my experience they are often the ones who are excluded the most from learning
opportunities. From the knowledge of the teams I work with, this can sometimes be because the
understanding of autistic learners is not strong, and in some cases children appear to ‘look normal’,
therefore negating the need for extra support. These children can be left on their own, and fail to
succeed, which then creates further issues as they are not being heard or catered for with their
learning. Universal Design for Learning is an effective framework for autistic learners, as it has a focus
on the child’s interests, strengths, and providing choice with the way they learn and demonstrate
their learning (Ministry of Education, 2018; Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People and Ministry of
Education, 2022). As Universal Design for Learning is also a culturally responsive framework, it means
Māori autistic learners are also able to be fully included in equitable learning opportunities (Chita-
Tegmark et al., 2012; Kieran & Anderson, 2018). UDL is a person-centred, strengths-based approach,
and relies on teachers knowing their children well. This aligns with te ao Māori principles by placing
an emphasis on relationships within the classroom, and allowing different ways of learning (Bishop &
Berryman, 2009; Hargraves, 2022; Ministry of Education, 2009). Learners are able to bring their
cultural experiences to their individual learning in authentic and inclusive ways through UDL (Chita-
Tegmark et al., 2012; Hargraves, 2022).



Literature review
Inclusive practice
Autism is a term used to identify a condition that affects social communication, social interactions
and behaviour functioning. From a deficit view, those diagnosed with autism are considered to have
impairments in social communication and social interaction, with restricted, repetitive patterns of
behaviour, interests, or activities (Ministry of Health, 2016; Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People
and Ministry of Education, 2022). When exploring the best strategies for inclusive education, viewing
autistic learners through a strengths-based lens is important to ensure that their potential is
recognised (Cosden et al., 2006). Altogether Autism (2018) identifies the following areas as strengths
for many autistic learners: visual processing; logical thinking; detail focus; strong ability to follow
rules and routines; and motivation to learn through engaging high interest areas. D. Mitchell (2010)




                                                                                                            31

--- PAGE 3 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                     Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



and Alesech and Nayar (2020) define inclusive education as education in which children with special
needs are able to engage fully in age appropriate classes in their local schools, and receive
appropriate adaptations and support services.

Despite inclusive practice being a core component of The New Zealand Curriculum that New Zealand
teachers are expected to abide by, many schools and teachers sometimes struggle to provide
teaching and learning opportunities which reflect the policies and conventions that underpin
education in New Zealand (Education Review Office, 2022; Kearney, 2013; Ministry of Education,
2015). These policies and conventions are: The New Zealand Disability Strategy, which ensures a
commitment is made to no child being denied access to their local school because of disability and all
children having access to resources that are equitable; and The United Nations Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Article 24, which requires New Zealand educators to promote
access, inclusion, empowerment, equity and the right to education for all (F. Mitchell, 2023; Office
for Disability Issues, 2016; United Nations, 2019). Articles 23, 28 and 29 of the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child state that all mentally or physically disabled children have a
right to active participation in the community, including the right to education that has equal
opportunities and the right to develop to their full potential (United Nations, 1989). The Education
and Training Act 2020 ensures that all New Zealanders have access to the skills, knowledge and
capabilities needed to fully participate in the community, and to support the health and well-being of
all children (New Zealand Government, 2020). The New Zealand Curriculum ascertains that as a
matter of social justice, everyone will have access to education in a way that works for them
(Ministry of Education, 2015).

An inclusive practice framework called Universal Design for Learning, which provides for overall
educational well-being, is promoted and well-resourced by the Ministry of Education. These
resources include videos, guidebooks, discussions around Universal Design for Learning, and practical
strategies for implementation (Ministry of Education, 2018). Universal Design for Learning can help
schools create flexible, inclusive and accessible learning opportunities for autistic learners. The UDL
framework supports teachers to make shifts from traditional teaching methods to equitable ones
and provides meaningful access to the general education curriculum and settings (Evmenova, 2018;
Ok et al., 2016; Smith & Lowrey, 2017). Learner variability is acknowledged within the UDL
framework by recognising that each learner links the three networks of the brain – affective,
recognition and strategic – in different ways, which influences the context in which learning occurs,
emotional states of each learner, and the experiences, knowledge, interest and abilities that each
child brings to the learning context (CAST, 2018c; Gordon et al., 2014). It is this combination that
makes every experience unique for the learner, and which makes their learning variable (Rose &
Meyer, 2002).

However, latest research shows that these guides are not being used effectively, if at all, by many
New Zealand teachers, and there are some teachers who do not understand that UDL starts with the
learner at the centre, and implementing this range of strategies ensures that all children, including
autistic children, are having their learning needs met (Education Review Office, 2022). This study
therefore focuses on the research question ‘to what extent do primary teachers use the Universal
Design for Learning framework to support an inclusive education for autistic learners in New



                                                                                                           32

--- PAGE 4 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                      Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



Zealand?’ It defines Universal Design for Learning as an inclusive practice, discusses the value of
using the framework, and situates the research within a New Zealand context.

Universal Design for Learning
There are three core principles of UDL which are linked to differing, yet interwoven, parts of the
brain. Under each principle sits a set of guidelines and checkpoints to help educators to reframe
teaching and learning (see Table 1). Multiple means of engagement is the first principle and is the
‘why’ of learning. This links to the affective network of the brain, which recognises the emotional and
motivational aspects of what we do and what we learn (Gordon et al., 2014). The second principle is
multiple means of representation and is the ‘what’ of learning. It links to the recognition network of
the brain and allows us to gather and process information in the environment and make sense of
that to use as effective knowledge (Gordon et al., 2014). The third principle is multiple means of
action and expression, the ‘how’ of learning, and is how students are able to effectively demonstrate
their understanding (CAST, 2018c). This is not a one size fits all approach, and requires teachers to
have a deep understanding and appreciation of the difference that all children bring to the
classroom, and a recognition that UDL planning starts with the child (Capp, 2017; CAST, 2018c;
Gordon et al., 2014).

The value of the Universal Design for Learning framework
The Universal Design for Learning framework has great value for all learners. The Aotearoa New
Zealand Autism Guideline recommends evidence-based strategies that educators should be using
with autistic learners to provide an inclusive education (Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People and
Ministry of Education, 2022). Although these strategies are not explicitly stated in these guidelines as
Universal Design for Learning, all of the recommendations fit into the framework (Gordon et al.,
2014; Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People and Ministry of Education, 2022). Using individualised
supports and services that focus on the child’s strengths to help meet goals can be addressed
through all three UDL principles. Implementing structured learning environments, taking into
account the setting, schedules, choices and supports available for autistic learners is covered through
providing multiple means of engagement. Teaching with systematic instruction, including explicit
teaching of educational content, can be met through a focus on the guidelines of providing multiple
means of representation. Specific curriculum content, involving the prioritisation of skills that are
required to participate fully, can be linked with providing multiple means of action and expression
(CAST, 2018b; D. Mitchell & Sutherland, 2020; Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People and Ministry
of Education, 2022). UDL has positive implications for autistic learners as it is focused on finding ways
that work for them so that the curriculum is equitable and accessible (Ministry of Education, 2018;
Smith & Lowrey, 2017). UDL is a way to ensure that diversity is embraced in the classroom, rather
than singled out. It allows teachers to identify and minimise potential barriers for individual learners
before they occur (Ministry of Education, 2018; Mirfin-Veitch et al., 2020). A study conducted by
Carrington et al. (2020) showed that educators who understand and implement UDL meet the needs
of autistic learners by overcoming barriers to learning and providing flexibility within planning and
teaching. Although this study was conducted in Australia, there are clear links to strategies for




                                                                                                            33

--- PAGE 5 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                    Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



      Table 1. The UDL checkpoints listed under each guideline and core principle, with examples




                                                             Adapted from “The UDL Guidelines” by Cast, 2011.




                                                                                                          34

--- PAGE 6 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                      Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



autistic learners that educators were using that can also be found in the Aotearoa New Zealand
Autism Guideline. For example, using the learner's interests and strengths, using visual systems,
explicit teaching and accepting different ways of communicating (Carrington et al., 2020; Denning &
Moody, 2013; Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People and Ministry of Education, 2022).

According to Smith (2023), it can be determined that by implementing UDL strategies such as
providing visual scaffolds in writing lessons, barriers to learning are removed for autistic learners
which then creates a positive impact in the engagement of the tasks. Universal Design for Learning
provides the flexibility that autistic learners need by allowing information to be presented in
different ways, and allowing different ways for them to demonstrate knowledge and skills, and
become engaged in their learning. It reduces barriers to instruction, while maintaining high and
realistic expectations for all learners (Edyburn, 2010).

Universal Design for Learning within a New Zealand context
Universal Design for Learning is a culturally responsive framework which makes it highly relevant to
New Zealand (Chita-Tegmark et al., 2012; Kieran & Anderson, 2018; Lakkala & Kyrö-Ämmälä, 2021).
UDL focuses on learner variability, and cultural diversity reflects the way learners experience and
interact with their contexts. Culture informs all aspects of learning, and provides different
experiences which are an important part of learner variability (Chita-Tegmark et al., 2012).

Bolstad and Gilbert (2012), in a report to the Ministry of Education on future-oriented learning and
teaching, noted that international education began to shift to a new phase in the latter part of the
20th century. It was a change preceded by an awareness of the world changing, and the amount of
human knowledge generated as a result. Within New Zealand, it was recognized that teachers
needed to actively develop capabilities of learners to allow them to successfully engage in the 21st
century, including shifts in how knowledge is gained and understood. Six principles emerged from
this report as essential for 21st century learners. These are personalising learning; new views of
equity, diversity and inclusivity; a curriculum that uses knowledge to develop learning capacity;
“changing the script”: rethinking learners’ and teachers’ roles; a culture of continuous learning for
teachers and educational leaders; and new kinds of partnerships and relationships (Bolstad & Gilbert,
2012).

These principles align with Universal Design for Learning, although within Bolstad and Gilbert’s
(2012) report this connection has not been made, potentially due to UDL not being as prominent at
the time of the report. Personalised learning is at the forefront of the UDL framework, and it
provides the opportunity for teachers to really understand and demonstrate an equitable curriculum
for all. Universal Design for Learning requires a shift in educational paradigms, in which the teaching
and learning roles are reassessed and used to benefit the learners, and support their development in
becoming expert learners. This framework requires teachers to deeply know and be able to connect
to the strengths and interests of each child (Bolstad & Gilbert, 2012; CAST, 2018c).

Universal Design for Learning is a person-centred and strengths-based approach, and holds the
underlying beliefs that all students require high and realistic expectations to be set; barriers to
success exist in the system, not in the student; a one size fits all approach does not work; and self-



                                                                                                            35

--- PAGE 7 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                     Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



reflection leads to expert learners (Butler, 2019; Schwartz, 2022). Ka Hikitia: Accelerating Success
2013–2017 is a unique strategy focus for New Zealand that emphasises the components required to
support educational success for Māori learners, while acknowledging the principles of the Treaty of
Waitangi (Ministry of Education, 2009, 2012). The strategies within Ka Hikitia allow teaching and
learning to happen for Māori learners in ways that support all learners to engage and achieve
success, by knowing their own potential and being able to successfully set goals (Ministry of
Education, 2013). This links in with the multiple means of action and expression principle of UDL,
where it is important to support learners to develop the skills of effective goal setting (CAST, 2018c).
Being a part of learning that is relevant and engaging aligns with the providing multiple means of
engagement principle. Providing multiple means of representation allows Māori learners to
demonstrate the skills and knowledge in ways that reflect who they are culturally, and provides
opportunities for te reo Māori (Māori language) and tikanga Māori (Māori culture) to be an
important aspect of accessibility (CAST, 2018c; Ministry of Education, 2013). The connection between
culturally responsive teaching and learning is even more important when considering Māori autistic
learners who often require support in relation to their autism, and who may already hold one
marginalised identity due to culture (Ratima & Ratima, 2007). These strategies align with the beliefs
of the UDL framework, and when effectively implemented, offer Māori learners the opportunity to
have their identity, language and culture valued and included in the classroom (Ministry of
Education, 2013).

While there is limited New Zealand research to indicate the use of UDL, worldwide literature
suggests that with professional development and an understanding of the UDL framework, there is
an increase in teacher’s confidence and use of UDL in practice (Engleman & Schmidt, 2007;
Evmenova, 2018). Studies from Kearney (2013) and F. Mitchell (2023) situated in New Zealand
conclude that the right perspective from teachers regarding inclusive practice is vital to the success
of implementing Universal Design for Learning. The latest research from the Education Review Office
(2022) regarding the quality and inclusiveness of education provision for disabled learners indicates
that the UDL framework has the potential to be a successful way to increase the strength of inclusive
practices within New Zealand classrooms. However, as it currently stands there are too many
teachers who perhaps dismiss UDL as what is already being done, or who do not have the confidence
to implement it as it needs to be. The understanding that reducing barriers for autistic learners
before they occur is vital (Butler, 2019).

In summary, autistic learners bring a range of strengths to classrooms, such as strong visual-spatial
skills, and memory and auditory skills (Bennie, 2019; Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People and
Ministry of Education, 2022). By enhancing these strengths, and providing multiple means of
engagement, representation and action and expression, teachers can provide an inclusive education
for these students. An inclusive education gives the opportunity to all children and young people to
be engaged in learning by being present, participating and increasing their sense of belonging
(Denning & Moody, 2013). In New Zealand, the Ministry of Education provides policies to guide
educators towards the importance of inclusive education, but research shows that there are still
many schools not providing this for their autistic learners (Bolstad & Gilbert, 2012; Ministry of
Education, 2015; Office for Disability Issues, 2016; United Nations, 2019). Universal Design for
Learning has been identified by the Ministry of Education as a framework that is culturally responsive


                                                                                                           36

--- PAGE 8 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                    Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



and inclusive of all learners, yet it does not seem to be reflected in many New Zealand schools
(Education Review Office, 2022; Ministry of Education, 2018).

Research suggests that using the guidelines of Universal Design for Learning provides the opportunity
for students to become expert learners through the way that they learn and the connection to the
networks of the brain, which sets them up for future success (CAST, 2018c). While there are limited
studies based in New Zealand, this framework is the way to provide for our 21st century learners,
and to keep up with the changing world we live in. There are many aspects of Universal Design for
Learning that add value to education in New Zealand today, and it is an equitable framework in
which all learners are able to be included in the general curriculum (Bolstad & Gilbert, 2012).



Methodology, method and ethics
The research question that this study focuses on is, ‘to what extent do primary teachers use the
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) framework to support an inclusive education for autistic learners
in New Zealand?’

This research used a quantitative approach, in the form of an online survey, to collect and analyse
numerical data for each checkpoint that supports the three core principles (multiple means of
engagement, multiple means of representation, and multiple means of action and expression) of the
Universal Design for Learning Framework. Gathering quantitative data through an online survey was
the best approach for this research to ensure that participants were able to give honest and
anonymous answers (McCombes, 2019). An online survey also reduced the risks in the current
climate due to the uncertainties during the COVID pandemic. The survey used a Likert scale of five
options to allow for participants to decide on answers and for the data to be captured and analysed
successfully. These were in a dropdown box, with the options never, occasionally, sometimes, often
and always (McCombes, 2019). The questions were derived from statements that are taken from the
UDL guidelines and checkpoints. A time frame of three weeks was allowed for the survey to be
completed, through Google Forms.

Participants for the study were recruited using social media platforms (NZ Primary, NZ New Entrants
Teachers, and Horowhenua Kāhui Ako). An information sheet providing an overview of the study and
the selection criteria was attached to ensure informed participation in the study. The eligibility
criteria for participants completing the survey was they needed to be a primary teacher in a New
Zealand primary school (year 0-8), and have taught an autistic child/group within the last five years
(due to UDL being in New Zealand in this timeframe). The survey needed to be completed with this
child/group in mind, rather than a focus on the whole class. This was to ascertain data in relation to
autistic learners and the use of UDL principles for inclusion of this group of learners. A total of 58
teachers responded.

Data has been analysed using percentages as a measurement tool, with a total of 55 eligible
completed surveys. The scales ‘sometimes’, ‘occasionally’ and ‘never’ have been combined together
for a total percentage with the understanding that for successful implementation of an inclusive



                                                                                                          37

--- PAGE 9 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                         Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



education, strategies should be used ‘often’ or ‘always’ to be effective (Lakkala & Kyrö-Ämmälä,
2021). Google Forms was used to create and share the survey due to being reliable, easy to navigate,
and giving a range of options to support the analysis of data. There may have been limitations with
using this method, as it can be easy just to click the answers you believe the researcher wants to
hear. With this in mind, all participants were asked to be reflective and honest when answering, and
the data gathered shows that this has been carried out as requested as there were a range of scales
used by individual respondents. Ethics approval for this research was obtained by completing a
Massey University low risk ethics application.



Results
The 55 participants in this study represented all primary age groups from Year 0 to Year 8. For the
purposes of this study, Year 8 has been included as primary to include both full primary schools and
intermediates. The participants were geographically spread across New Zealand, with the majority of
participants situated in the North Island. Figure 1 shows the participants according to the year level
they taught.




                              Figure 1. Number of teachers at each year level who
                                           responded to the survey


Research findings have been organised into the following categories to demonstrate the extent of
the participants' understanding of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) as a framework: using multiple
means of engagement, using multiple means of representation and using multiple means of action
and expression. This allowed data to be gathered that was able to show to what extent UDL was
being used by the participants and has provided discussion of more common strategies being used
versus those least known and used least effectively.

Understanding of UDL
There were varying understandings of the Universal Design for Learning framework from
participants. Well over half of participants (65%) had heard of Universal Design for Learning within
their contexts. Over half (51%) of participants stated that they did not implement the principles of



                                                                                                               38

--- PAGE 10 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                        Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



UDL in their programmes, or were unsure if they did. Thirty-five percent stated that they had not
heard of UDL before. However, when analysing individual anonymous responses, the data showed
that some teachers were in fact using some of the principles without realising what the underlying
framework of UDL was.

Professional development had not been provided for 75% of participants, while some indicated that
they had encountered the framework through recent studies, or as a part of in-school professional
development conversations. Data results across all three principles of UDL (multiple means of
engagement, multiple means of representation, and multiple means of action and expression)
showed that participants found implementing multiple means of action and expression the most
challenging.

Figure 2 shows the overall use of the three principles. The scales sometimes, occasionally, and never
are combined together because optimally teachers should be consistently following guidelines for
UDL to provide the most benefit for autistic learners.




                           Figure 2. Percentage of teachers who always or often use
                                   UDL strategies across the three principles


Overall, combining the percentages of always and often, 74% of participants consistently provided a
range of multiple means of engagement strategies, 63% provided a range of multiple means of
representation strategies, and 59% provided a range of multiple means of action and expression
strategies.

Multiple means of engagement
Most of the strategies indicated in the multiple means of engagement principle of UDL saw
participants always or often using them in their teaching. Figure 3 identifies that 84% of participants
were consistently using strategies such as choice boards, alternative seating, preferred topics,
enlarged equipment, and free play for their autistic learners. Classroom programmes were shown to
be culturally, socially, age and ability appropriate for 87% of participants.




                                                                                                              39

--- PAGE 11 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                        Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.




                         Figure 3. Percentage of teachers providing choices to assist
                                 autistic learners in expressing their learning


Providing a safe environment for learners, while taking into account acoustics, lighting, sunlight,
brain breaks, fidget toys, and sensory options was well represented with 72% of participants doing
this always or often (Figure 4).




                Figure 4. Percentage of teachers providing a safe space for autistic learners


Of the 55 participants, 54% indicated that they did not consistently encourage autistic learners to
discuss goals, or provide learners with a range of options to meet the goals. Providing a classroom
environment that fosters collaboration and community was actioned by 82% of participants,
indicating that they used circle times, social support systems and active listening to do this. The data
for providing options for self-regulation showed that 78% of teachers were supporting autistic
learners with personal coping skills and strategies by modelling, movement breaks, mindfulness and
calming strategies and spaces being used.

Figure 5 indicates that 85% of participants used strategies for autistic children such as brain breaks,
reinforcers, task variation, visible boundaries, and first/then task boards to optimise motivation and
develop relationships, while making authentic connections.




                                                                                                              40

--- PAGE 12 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                         Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.




                       Figure 5. Percentage of teachers building positive and authentic
                                      relationships with autistic learners



Multiple means of representation
Figure 6 shows within the principle of providing multiple means of representation that 67% of
participants varied resources to provide challenges for students to learn with degrees of difficulty.




                              Figure 6. Percentage of teachers using strategies to
                                              optimise challenges


When it came to providing consistent options that give alternatives to relying solely on auditory and
visual information, which includes taking into consideration the use of closed captions, New Zealand
Sign Language, audio books and high contrast texts, 62% of participants indicated that they did not
do this (Figure 7).




                 Figure 7. Percentage of teachers not providing options in programmes for
                                      auditory and visual differences


                                                                                                               41

--- PAGE 13 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                        Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



Eighty percent of participants believed that they provided scaffolding and prompts for their autistic
learners. However, over half (53%) of participants stated that they did not consistently model using
explicit teaching strategies for learners to be able to transfer the knowledge to other content areas
(Figure 8).




                    Figure 8. Percentage of teachers not modelling with explicit teaching
                                       strategies for autistic learners


Over half (58%) of participants sometimes, occasionally or never supported understanding across
languages by making key information available in first languages (the language the learner speaks
and understands the most fluently) of autistic learners (Figure 9).




                       Figure 9. Percentage of teachers not supporting understanding
                                             across languages


Providing representation through different options to support building comprehension (such as
picture choices, maths manipulatives and visual aids) was indicated as being always or often used by
67% of participants (Figure 10).




                                                                                                              42

--- PAGE 14 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                         Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.




                       Figure 10. Percentage of teachers providing different options to
                                       support building comprehension



Multiple means of action and expression
When analysing data related to multiple means of action and expression, there were wider gaps
evident in the data. Access to assistive technologies, such as communication boards, adaptive
switches, speech to text, text to speech, and word prediction software, was provided inconsistently
by over half (51%) of participants (Figure 11).




                            Figure 11. Percentage of teachers not using alternative
                                       technologies for autistic learners


Providing more than one way to complete assessments so autistic learners could express their
understanding without barriers was indicated as being used sometimes, occasionally, or never by
56% of participants (Figure 12).




                                                                                                               43

--- PAGE 15 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                        Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.




                      Figure 12. Percentage of teachers not providing opportunities for
                      autistic learners to express their understanding without barriers


Figure 13 shows that 56% of teachers were inconsistently providing personalised plans, explicit
instruction and goal setting for autistic learners. Explicit instruction was also represented by a low
percentage within the principle of representation. Forty-four percent of participants did not
consistently provide options such as adapted equipment, handwriting adaptations, and physical
accessibility for wheelchairs/mobility. Sixty-seven percent of participants were always or often
providing options such as templates, multiple choice, and interactive activities to support autistic
learners to build fluency. In contrast, 53% of participants were not consistently providing
organisation tools and scaffolds to support these learners.




                    Figure 13. Percentage of teachers not providing personalised plans,
                          explicit instruction and goal setting for autistic learners



Discussion
Previous research has demonstrated that inclusive practice in New Zealand schools is not as strong as
it should be (Education Review Office, 2022; Kearney, 2013; D. Mitchell & Sutherland, 2020; F.
Mitchell, 2023). The results have helped to address the question of this study ‘to what extent do
primary teachers use the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) framework to support an inclusive
education for autistic learners in New Zealand?’ This research question is outlined below as
understanding the UDL as a framework, and then the extent of which each core principle (multiple
means of engagement, representation and action and expression) of UDL is used by the participants
of this study.



                                                                                                              44

--- PAGE 16 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                      Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



Understanding UDL as a framework
Overall, the data showed that a large majority of participants used some principles from the
Universal Design for Learning framework, although they were not always aware of what they were
doing, or even perhaps making conscious decisions to implement them (Moffat, 2022). Participants
primarily taught juniors (Year 1-4), although senior teachers were represented (Year 5-8). The latest
research from the Education Review Office (2022) indicated that a large number of teachers are not
using the provided guides from the Ministry of Education about UDL and inclusive practice. This
aligns with this current study as some of the strategies being used may appear to be naturally
occurring ones that teachers often do not need to think about if they have had plenty of experience
with autistic learners (Ok et al., 2016). Data showed a large number of teachers had not had the
opportunity for professional development in UDL, and also a concerning number had not heard of
UDL at all before. The Education Review Office (2022) report confirms that teachers lack
opportunities to improve their skills, and to develop knowledge of inclusive practices that will benefit
autistic learners.

Using multiple means of engagement
The data demonstrates that providing multiple means of engagement for autistic learners is a high
priority for most participants. The findings from the study suggest that participants are building
opportunities for autistic learners to provide input into how some classroom tasks are designed, and
including a variety of classroom activities to cater for different experiences, identities, backgrounds
and cultures (National Center on Universal Design, 2014). Opportunities are occurring for providing
options for self-regulation. Self-regulation fits into the New Zealand curriculum as a whole,
particularly with a recent focus on school wide mindfulness programmes (Kenwright et al., 2021;
Ministry of Education, 2015). Participants are showing that they are providing learner variability for
autistic learners by considering the emotional state of the learner as being important (Ministry of
Education, 2018; Rose & Meyer, 2002).

A high number of participants are considering engagement in terms of using evidence-based
strategies for autistic learners such as choice boards, preferred topics and allowing for alternative
classroom setups to meet the individual needs of the child (Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People
and Ministry of Education, 2022). The majority of participants within this study are ensuring that
programmes for autistic learners are culturally, socially, age and ability appropriate, which reflects
back to the New Zealand curriculum as an inclusive and culturally responsive document (Macarthur,
2009; Ministry of Education, 2015). This also sits in alignment with a safe environment being
provided for learners. Although the data shows higher numbers here, which also reflects other
relevant studies, the concern is still there for the approximately 20 to 30 percent of participants that
are not providing a safe learning environment consistently for their autistic learners (Education
Review Office, 2022; Kearney, 2013). For the child to feel as though they belong, and are safe, it is
paramount to have effective engagement in their learning (Alesech & Nayar, 2020; Gordon et al.,
2014; F. Mitchell, 2023).




                                                                                                            45

--- PAGE 17 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                      Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



Over half of the participants were not consistently providing options to discuss goals with autistic
learners and to make learning visible for them. Goal setting is an important part of the UDL
framework, with personalised learning at the forefront (Bolstad & Gilbert, 2012; CAST, 2018c).

Using multiple means of representation
In a study conducted by Barker (2017), it was discovered that multiple means of representation was
the principle that teachers found the most challenging. It suggests that participants are not as
comfortable with understanding how to provide different ways for learners to make connections
with concepts by considering sensory needs, language or cultural differences, and learning needs, all
of which can be evident in autistic learners (CAST, 2018b; Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People
and Ministry of Education, 2022). This is perhaps where the lack of understanding of the framework
as a whole lets the teachers down (Education Review Office, 2022). Barker (2017) suggests that this
may also be because it is harder to show and plan for representation strategies than engagement
ones. A majority of the participants used scaffolding strategies to support autistic learners, with
numbers then dropping to a concerning low when thinking about explicit teaching. Bolstad and
Gilbert (2012) stated that explicit teaching is a part of the shift needed in education, with learners
needing support to develop the capabilities needed to successfully engage in the world today. This is
perhaps linked to teachers not being confident in teaching disabled learners, as stated by the
Education Review Office (2022).

Using multiple means of action and expression
The principle of multiple means of action and expression had the least participants providing the
opportunities that autistic learners need to interact with accessible materials and tools, work toward
goals, and make the most out of their learning. The low percentage of teachers providing options for
adapted equipment, physical accessibility and ways to respond differently to the same learning task
is concerning. This does not align with literature that states equity, diversity and inclusivity are vital
to autistic learners (Bolstad & Gilbert, 2012; Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People and Ministry of
Education, 2022). The Education Review Office (2022) states that to thrive at school, learners “need
to be fully included in all aspects of education and for education to be adapted to their needs” (p. 2).
By not providing the adaptations that may be needed, autistic learners are being set up to fail
(F. Mitchell, 2023; Smith & Lowrey, 2017). Explicit instruction also falls short under this principle of
UDL, as discussed previously. UDL requires that explicit instruction is carried out for all learners. The
Aotearoa New Zealand Autism Guideline recommends the prioritisation of skills for autistic learners
that are required to participate fully, which often need to be explicitly taught (CAST, 2018b; Edyburn,
2010; Gordon et al., 2014; Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People and Ministry of Education, 2022).
Another weak point in the data was related to feedback. This links to the low percentage of teachers
who are providing opportunities for goal setting, as mentioned under the representation principle.
Feedback is important as learning cannot happen without it. Autistic learners need a clear picture of
progress so that learning can change to become more successful (Bolstad & Gilbert, 2012; CAST,
2018a; Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People and Ministry of Education, 2022). The Education
Review Office (2022) also found through their research that too many disabled learners are not
progressing sufficiently.




                                                                                                            46

--- PAGE 18 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                      Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.




Conclusion with recommendations for future action
This study aimed to identify the extent that primary teachers used the Universal Design for Learning
framework to support an inclusive education for autistic learners in New Zealand. It can be
concluded that teachers use some strategies across the three principles of UDL: providing multiple
means of engagement (the ‘why’ of learning); providing multiple means of representation (the ‘what’
of learning); and providing multiple means of action and expression (the ‘how’ of learning). Providing
multiple means of engagement is represented well by most teachers within the study. Many of these
strategies are strong factors within New Zealand schools, such as ensuring programmes are culturally
responsive for learners. Overall, New Zealand teachers create safe environments for their learners,
but more intentional thought needs to be put into ensuring this is true for all autistic learners
(Education Review Office, 2022; Moffat, 2022).

Providing multiple means of representation, and action and expression, through evidence-based
strategies for autistic learners, are not used as frequently by teachers within the study. Providing key
information through multiple means of representation is not being used consistently to support
autistic learners to build important knowledge and develop thinking around concepts. Action and
expression links to the strategic network of the brain, and for autistic learners this needs to include
opportunities to plan and organise, and then be able to demonstrate their learning in a range of
ways.

While this research has addressed a gap in the knowledge around the understanding and use of
Universal Design for Learning in New Zealand primary schools, there have been limitations to the
study. Quantitative data was gathered through an online survey across New Zealand from primary
teachers who currently teach an autistic child or group of children, or have had experience within the
last five years. The study surveyed a small number of teachers (55) across New Zealand. As a
quantitative study, participants were only asked to rate using a Likert scale how they felt each
guideline of UDL was used in their class for autistic learners. Therefore, there was not the
opportunity to observe strategies in place in classrooms, or discuss with teachers their use and
understanding of UDL and inclusive practice.

Based on these conclusions, school management teams, and the Ministry of Education, need to
recognise that inclusive practice and Universal Design for Learning are where teachers need more
robust professional development to build the confidence of teaching autistic learners. Teachers need
to be able to easily access the inclusive practice guides provided online by the Ministry of Education
to enhance their understanding of what inclusive practice is and ways classroom programmes can be
strengthened to be more inclusive. This may require breaking information down into manageable
amounts (such as webinars) and a school-wide focus to be able to discuss and implement UDL
effectively. Further research is needed to determine the barriers and enablers for teachers to
implement the Universal Design for Learning framework consistently and consciously in their classes.
Teachers have the scope to make major changes by implementing and sustaining inclusive practices
for autistic children, and to honour the policies and conventions ratified in New Zealand that state all
children have the right to an inclusive education, and the right to the chance of a successful, fulfilled
and accepted life within the community.


                                                                                                            47

--- PAGE 19 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                      Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.




References
Alesech, J., & Nayar, S. (2020). Acceptance and belonging in New Zealand: Understanding inclusion
      for children with special education needs. International Journal of Whole Schooling, 16(1), 84–
      116.
Altogether Autism. (2018). Strengths and abilities in autism. https://www.altogetherautism.org.nz/
      strengths-and-abilities-in-autism/
Barker, E. (2017). Universal design for learning: Implementation and outcomes in a New Zealand
      primary school context [Masters thesis]. The University of Auckland.
      http://hdl.handle.net/2292/37014
Bennie, M. (2019). The positives of autism. Autism Awareness.
      https://autismawarenesscentre.com/the-positives-of-autism/
Bishop, R., & Berryman, M. (2009). The Te Kotahitanga effective teaching profile. Set: Research
      Information for Teachers, 2, 27–34. https://doi.org/10.18296/set.0461
Bolstad, R., & Gilbert, J. (2012). Supporting future-oriented learning and teaching: A New Zealand
      perspective. Ministry of Education. https://www.educationcounts.govt.nz/__data/assets/
      pdf_file/0003/109317/994_Future-oriented-07062012.pdf
Butler, C. (2019). Translating UDL: An Aotearoa/New Zealand story. Learning Designed.
      https://www.learningdesigned.org/resource/translating-udl-aotearoanew-zealand-story
Capp, M. J. (2017). The effectiveness of universal design for learning: A meta-analysis of literature
      between 2013 and 2016. International Journal of Inclusive Education, 21(8), 791–807.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/13603116.2017.1325074
Carrington, S., Saggers, B., Webster, A., Harper-Hill, K., & Nickerson, J. (2020). What universal design
      for learning principles, guidelines, and checkpoints are evident in educators’ descriptions of
      their practice when supporting students on the autism spectrum? International Journal of
      Educational Research, 102, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2020.101583
CAST. (2011). Universal design for learning guidelines version 2.0. https://udlguidelines.cast.org/
      binaries/content/assets/udlguidelines/udlg-v2-0/udlg_graphicorganizer_v2-0.pdf
CAST. (2018a). UDL: Action & expression. https://udlguidelines.cast.org/action-expression
CAST. (2018b). UDL: Representation. https://udlguidelines.cast.org/representation
CAST. (2018c). Universal design for learning guidelines. https://udlguidelines.cast.org/
Chita-Tegmark, M., Gravel, J. W., Maria De Lourdes, B. S., Domings, Y., & Rose, D. H. (2012). Using the
      universal design for learning framework to support culturally diverse learners. Journal of
      Education, 192(1), 17–22. https://doi.org/10.1177/002205741219200104
Cosden, M., Koegel, L. K., Koegel, R. L., Greenwell, A., & Klein, E. (2006). Strength-based assessment
     for children with autism spectrum disorders. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe
     Disabilities, 31(2), 134–143. https://doi.org/10.1177/154079690603100206




                                                                                                            48

--- PAGE 20 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                     Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



Denning, C., & Moody, A. (2013). Supporting students with autism spectrum disorders in inclusive
     settings: Rethinking instruction and design settings. Electronic Journal for Inclusive Education,
     3(1). https://corescholar.libraries.wright.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1153&context=ejie
Education Review Office. (2022). Thriving at school? Education for disabled learners in schools.
     https://ero.govt.nz/our-research/thriving-at-school-education-for-disabled-learners-in-schools
Edyburn, D. (2010). Would you recognize universal design for learning if you saw it? Ten propositions
     for new directions for the second decade of UDL. Learning Disability Quarterly, 33(1), 33-41.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/073194871003300103
Engleman, M., & Schmidt, M. (2007). Testing an experimental universally designed learning unit in a
     graduate level online teacher education course. Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 3(2),
     112–132. https://jolt.merlot.org/vol3no2/engleman.pdf
Evmenova, A. (2018). Preparing teachers to use universal design for learning to support diverse
     learners. Journal of Online Learning Research, 4(2), 147–171.
Gordon, D., Meyer, A., & Rose, D. (2014). Universal design for learning: Theory and practice. CAST
     Professional Publishing.
Hargraves, V. (2022). Seven principles to effectively support Māori students as Māori. The Education
      Hub. https://theeducationhub.org.nz/seven-principles-to-effectively-support-maori-students-
      as-maori/
Kearney, A. (2013). Barriers to inclusive education: The identification and elimination of exclusion
     from and within school. In Centre of Excellence for Research in Inclusive Education (Eds.),
     Inclusive education: Perspectives on professional practice (pp. 40-51). Dunmore Publishing.
Kenwright, D., McLaughlin, T., & Hansen, S. (2021). Teachers’ perspectives about mindfulness
     programmes in primary schools to support wellbeing and positive behaviour. International
     Journal of Inclusive Education, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/13603116.2020.1867382
Kieran, L., & Anderson, C. (2018). Connecting universal design for learning with culturally responsive
      teaching. Education and Urban Society, 51(9), 1202–1216.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/0013124518785012
Lakkala, S., & Kyrö-Ämmälä, O. (2021). Teaching for diversity with UDL: Analysing teacher
      competence. In A. Galkienė & O. Monkevičienė (Eds.), Improving inclusive education through
      universal design for learning (pp. 241–277). Springer.
Macarthur, J. (2009). Learning better together: Working towards inclusive education in New Zealand
     schools. IHC New Zealand. https://inclusive.tki.org.nz/assets/inclusive-
     education/resources/files/learning-better-together.pdf
McCombes, S. (2019). How to write research methodology in four steps. Scribbr.
    https://www.scribbr.com/dissertation/methodology/
Ministry of Education. (2009). Ka hikitia: Managing for success. Māori education strategy 2008-2012.
      Summary. Ministry of Education.




                                                                                                           49

--- PAGE 21 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                      Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



Ministry of Education. (2012). NZC updates: Curriculum resources.
      https://nzcurriculum.tki.org.nz/Curriculum-resources/NZC-Updates/Issue-16-January-2012
Ministry of Education. (2013). Ka hikitia: Accelerating success 2013-2017. Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education. (2015). The New Zealand curriculum. Learning Media.
Ministry of Education. (2018). Why UDL is valuable. Inclusive Education.
      https://inclusive.tki.org.nz/guides/universal-design-for-learning/why-udl-is-valuable/
Ministry of Education. (2021). Overview of ongoing resourcing scheme (ORS). Education in New
      Zealand. https://www.education.govt.nz/school/student-support/special-
      education/ors/overview-of-ors/
Ministry of Health. (2016). New Zealand autism spectrum disorder: Guideline summary. Ministry of
      Health.
Mirfin-Veitch, B., Jalota, N., & Schmidt, L. (2020). Responding to neurodiversity in the education
      context: An integrative literature review. Donald Beasley Institute.
      https://www.educationcounts.govt.nz/__data/assets/pdf_file/0018/208503/Responding-to-
      neurodiversity-in-the-education-context.pdf
Mitchell, D. (2010). Education that fits: Review of international trends in the education of students
     with special educational needs. University of Canterbury.
     https://www.educationcounts.govt.nz/publications/special_education/education-that-fits-
     review-of-international-trends-in-the-education-of-students-with-special-educational-needs
Mitchell, D., & Sutherland, D. (2020). What really works in special and inclusive education: Using
     evidence-based teaching strategies (3rd ed.). Routledge.
Mitchell, F. (2023). The implications of a non-inclusive education for autistic children and young
     people. Kairaranga, 24(1), 33–42. https://doi.org/10.54322/kairaranga.v24i1.160
Moffat, T. (2022). The beauty of universal design for learning (UDL) and why everyone in early
     childhood education and intervention should be using it. Kairaranga, 23(1), 66–73.
     https://doi.org/10.54322/kairaranga.v23i1.281
National Center on Universal Design. (2014). ENGAGEMENT: Universal design for learning principle 3.
      The Center for Excellence in Teaching and Learning.
New Zealand Government. (2020). Education and training act 2020.
     https://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/2020/0038/latest/LMS170676.html
Office for Disability Issues. (2016). Outcome 1: Education. https://www.odi.govt.nz/nz-disability-
       strategy/education/
Ok, M. W., Rao, K., Bryant, B. R., & McDougall, D. (2016). Universal design for learning in pre-K to
      grade 12 classrooms: A systematic review of research. Exceptionality, 25(2), 116–138.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/09362835.2016.1196450
Ratima, K., & Ratima, M. (2007). Māori experience of disability and disability support services. In B.
     Robson & R. Harris (Eds.), Hauora: Māori standards of health IV. A study of the years 2000-



                                                                                                            50

--- PAGE 22 OF 22 ---
Kairaranga, 2023, 24(2), 30-51.                       Weaving educational threads. Weaving educational practice.



       2005 (pp. 189-198). University of Otago. https://www.otago.ac.nz/wellington/
       otago067751.pdf
Rose, D. H., & Meyer, A. (2002). Teaching every student in the digital age: Universal design for
      learning. Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Schwartz, S. (2022). 4 principles of a universal design for learning approach. Edutopia.
     https://www.edutopia.org/article/4-principles-universal-design-learning-approach
Smith, S. (2023). Engaging potential: Using the UDL principle of engagement to motivate year 7-8
      learners with autism in writing tasks. Kairaranga, 24(1), 57–70.
      https://doi.org/10.54322/kairaranga.v24i1.344
Smith, S. J., & Lowrey, K. A. (2017). Applying the universal design for learning framework for
      individuals with intellectual disability: The future must be now. Intellectual and Developmental
      Disabilities, 55(1), 48–51. https://doi.org/10.1352/1934-9556-55.1.48
United Nations. (1989). Convention on the rights of the child. https://www.ohchr.org/en/
      instruments-mechanisms/instruments/convention-rights-child
United Nations. (2019). Article 24: Education. https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/
      convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-24-education.html
Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled People, & Ministry of Education. (2022). Aotearoa New Zealand
     autism guideline: He waka huia takiwātanga rau (3rd ed.). Whaikaha – Ministry of Disabled
     People. https://www.whaikaha.govt.nz/assets/Autism-Guideline/Aotearoa-New-Zealand-
     Autism-Guideline-Third-Edition.pdf




 AUTHOR PROFILE

                        Fiona Mitchell
                        Fiona Mitchell is a Specialist Outreach Teacher with Arahunga School, working
                        in the Manawatū/Horowhenua area. She has many years of experience
                        working with a range of diverse learners. She has recently completed a Master
                        of Specialist Teaching (ASD) through Massey University. Fiona is passionate
                        about inclusive practices that allow for equitable, strengths-based approaches
                        for all children to be able to access education.
                        Email: fmitchell@welearn.school.nz




                                                                                                             51

